From The New York Times,
>> [music]
>> I'm Rachel Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> For weeks, the United States has been
building up an enormous military
presence around Iran,
even as negotiators from both [music]
countries plan to meet later this week
in the hopes of finding a diplomatic
off-ramp to the escalating tensions.
Now,
>> [music]
>> as President Trump signals a potential
attack, our colleague David Sanger
explains what [music] the president
hopes to achieve through military action
and why he's chosen [music] this moment.
It's Tuesday, February [music] 24th.
David Sanger, welcome back to The Daily.
Rachel, great to be with you.
The last time we talked about Iran on
the show, we were in the middle of this
brutal crackdown on anti-government
protesters who were protesting the
regime.
And at the time, there was a huge
question about whether the United States
would take some kind of military action.
That obviously did not happen, but in
the weeks since, we have seen this
massive military build-up in the region.
So, David, can you just start by
describing what that build-up looks like
and what we understand about what
exactly is going on in this moment?
Well, Rachel, the build-up is the
largest we've seen in the Middle East
since the run-up to the war in Iraq in
2003. Wow. There are two aircraft
carriers in the region, the Abraham
Lincoln and the Gerald R. Ford, which
has come back from Venezuela.
There are fighter jets, refueling
capability,
bombers, they are all taking up
positions from Jordan all through our
bases in the region.
And meanwhile, there's the last gasp of
a diplomatic track underway. On
Thursday, we expect that the Iranians
will be meeting with the two main
American negotiators,
uh Steve Witkoff and Jared Kushner, to
present a package that might satisfy
President Trump's demands. But the
president has made clear
that he is thinking of everything from a
limited strike on Iran to what could be
a much larger military action that could
take days or weeks.
You mentioned that the president has
made demands. What are those demands
exactly? Like, what does the United
States want right now, and what are they
trying to achieve either through these
talks or through any kind of potential
military action?
You know, there's a bit of a murkiness
on this issue. Usually, when presidents
get to a situation like this,
they're pretty clear about what it is
they are seeking.
But in this case, the president has not
been clear.
>> [music]
>> The president's offered a dizzying array
of rationales for the military action
that we may see. Donald Trump is urging
Iranians to keep protesting, saying If
Iran shoots and violently kills peaceful
protesters, which is their custom, the
United States of America will come to
their rescue.
He's talked about supporting the
protesters, of course. We talked about
Hamas, and we talked about disarmament.
He's talked about cutting off support
for the proxies, like Hezbollah and
Hamas. There's nothing that would do
more good for this part of the world
than for Iran's leaders to renounce
terror, stop threatening their
neighbors, quit funding their
militant proxies, and He's talked about
taking out Iran's missile capability,
the missiles that can reach Israel.
These are all conventional weapons, but
they pose a big threat to a major
American ally.
And then of course, there's the one big
reason he keeps returning to. You can't
have peace in the Middle East if they
have a nuclear weapon.
And uh they can't have a nuclear weapon.
>> [music]
>> And that is going after the remnants of
Iran's nuclear portfolio. I hope they're
not trying to build up again because if
they [music] are, we're going to have no
choice but very quickly to eradicate
that build-up.
The nuclear portfolio, we should
mention, which the president had
previously claimed that the US had wiped
out back in the summer.
That's right, Rachel. And you know, just
to wind back the clock for a moment, you
may remember that in June there was a
12-day war that the Israelis initiated
against Iran. Right.
>> And that it ended with a US attack on
the three major nuclear enrichment sites
that Iran has built up over the decades.
And these were three sites that only the
US Air Force had the capability with
bunker busters to get down deep enough
to try to destroy.
And in the course of doing that, they
ended up burying under the rubble
Iran's stockpile of enriched uranium
that was enriched to a purity just shy
of what you would need to make a nuclear
weapon. And just to be clear,
after the US conducted that whole
campaign, what would be left now to hit
through some kind of military action?
Well, there are still targets. There are
places where the Iranians have made
nuclear centrifuges, the machines that
spin at at supersonic speeds and produce
uranium. You could wipe out some of
those targets.
David, the last time that the United
States took a military action against
Iran, it was in close coordination with
Israel, which is obviously our biggest
ally in the region. They have grave
concerns about Iran's nuclear and
missile programs.
What do we know about Israel's
involvement this time around?
Well, we know that Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has been talking
frequently to President Trump. He came
for a visit about 2 weeks ago and what
little leaked out from that session
indicated that the Israeli government
was quite concerned that the US wasn't
paying enough attention to the missiles.
And it's the missiles that can reach
Israel
that actually pierced the missile
defenses last time and struck some
civilian targets and killed some
Israelis.
And you know, at the same time, the
president has got some people in his
ear, including Iran hardliners in
Congress, saying, "You will never have
an opportunity like you've got right
now.
That Iran and Ayatollah Khamenei have
never been weaker. Mhm. They're
economically on the ropes. There are
protests in the streets.
People are sick of their government and
the repression surrounding it.
And that after the war in June, they
have never fully recovered militarily.
Just take the moment to push them over
the cliff.
So, the president may have in the back
of his mind a great desire to seize the
moment. But at the same time,
this is risky business.
This is a country of 90 million people.
They have considerable ability not only
to strike back with missiles,
but with a terror network that runs
throughout Europe and to some degree has
shown some capability to operate inside
the United States.
They've got significant cyber
capabilities as well. So, it's hardly
guaranteed that this is going to be a a
like one night attack like you saw in
June when they went after the nuclear
sites.
It's very possible that the Iranians
could respond, the US then escalates,
the Iranians then escalate,
and you're into a bigger conflict than
anyone wants to see happen
in the Middle East. Okay, so it sounds
like there are a lot of people in the
president's ear right now. There's
Netanyahu, there are the Iran hawks in
Congress.
But, one thing that I think has been
very top of mind, at least since the
protests in January, is regime change
and how a lot of these goals that you
mentioned that the administration could
be considering right now could lead to
that depending on what kind of military
action they take. Is that part of the
calculation here?
We have to assume that it's one of the
biggest parts of the calculation.
But, the fact of the matter is the
president has stopped just short of
that.
And when the topic came up with
Secretary of State Marco Rubio in some
Senate testimony last month,
he said, "Well, this would be big and
complicated and we'd have to give a lot
of thought to what that would look
like." Well, a little late to come to
the conclusion we have to think that
through. The fact of the matter is the
government of the United States has been
thinking about regime change in Iran for
decades. Right. So, there are a couple
of big questions here, Rachel.
The first is,
can you bring about regime change with
an air campaign? It's not clear at all
that that's necessarily going to work.
Second, if it does work, what's the
assurance that the government that would
come in would be any friendlier to the
United States?
It could just be another repressive
regime.
And the other risk, of course,
is that this could just escalate
>> [music]
>> into a much larger regional conflict.
Which would be entirely understandable
if the Iranians decided that the regime
was at risk and they were going to throw
everything into the retaliation.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
David, when we think about a potential
military strike in Iran and what that
might mean for regime change, I am, of
course, reminded about the recent action
that the US took in Venezuela when it
removed the president, Nicolas Maduro.
My sense is at least that that really
caused other countries to sit up a
little straighter in the face of US
pressure. And so, I wonder whether that
is coming into play here at all with how
the US is interacting with Iran in this
moment.
Well, Rachel, I think it's definitely
part of the calculation. I mean, first
of all, there is a just overall
similarity to the gunboat diplomacy
here, right? You mass a naval fleet off
the coast, you issue a set of demands,
and if the demands are not met, you then
use that military force
to compel the country to change the way
you want it to change. Mhm. But there's
also a real difference here as well.
Because in Venezuela, it was a very
targeted operation. They were aiming for
one guy, Maduro.
And when they pulled him out of there
and sent him off to the Brooklyn
Detention Center, they left the rest of
his government fully in place.
In Iran, however,
it seems very unlikely that that model
would work.
First of all, it's a much larger
country. It's 90 million people.
Second, it's a lot more complex. It's a
lot better armed. It's got air defenses
that Maduro never had. It's got a
population that may go along with the
removal of the government, but also has
bitter memories of CIA efforts to bring
about coups in Iran in the 1950s.
And finally,
if the US was successful,
it's not clear that you could leave the
existing government in place the way
they have in Venezuela. You'd have to
take out that entire structure run by
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
You'd have to eliminate almost all of
those loyalists to Ayatollah Khamenei.
So, it's not clear that you would have
someone in place to go run the country
and to respond to those American
demands.
Okay, so given the fact that a military
action would be extremely complicated in
Iran,
what would a more  limited strike
look like that the United States is
actually considering?
It's a good question, cuz there are all
kinds of targets.
They could go after the Basij, which is
the local militia groups that have been
used to put down the protesters. Mhm.
That way at least the president could
say he's making good on his commitment.
They could go after the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps. And you may
remember that back in 2020, in his first
term, President Trump ordered a drone
strike on the head of the Quds Force,
the most elite part of the Iranian
military, and managed to kill him.
So, you could imagine more attacks on
the leadership of the IRGC.
You could imagine attacks that were just
limited to those missiles and missile
sites
and the launchers that Israel's most
worried about.
But all of those would gain mostly a
tactical advantage. Mhm. If the
government didn't change, the military
leaders will get replaced. Eventually,
Iran will
build more missiles or buy them.
So, the real question is, are you just
mowing the lawn or are you bringing
about real change?
How concerned is Iran about all of this
or any of this?
Well, Rachel, the Iranians have made it
pretty clear they're deeply concerned. I
mean, first of all, we've seen them
burying and reinforcing some
nuclear-related sites or suspected
nuclear-related sites that hadn't been
hit back in June. Second, they've moved
a good number of their missiles and
other arms to the borders where they
could more easily reach American bases
or Israel to make the point that they're
going to get some shots off if they get
attacked.
Thirdly,
there's the strange action by Ayatollah
Khamenei,
who is 86 years old and presumably has
some succession plans anyway,
but as we've reported in the Times,
he's deepened those in recent times. So,
the supreme leader is clearly aware that
the US may be going for regime change
and he wants an insurance policy against
that.
These are all the kind of preparations
we've not really seen the Iranians take
at this level before.
At the same time though, of course,
there are these diplomatic talks.
What kind of off-ramp, if any, is being
considered right now so that we do not
see this kind of escalation?
Well, the talks have been stymied a bit
by
the problem that the US is demanding
that there is no uranium enrichment. In
other words, that Iran get completely
out of the business of making any
nuclear fuel.
And there's an interesting idea that's
been floated, which is to allow the
Iranians to have a very limited
enrichment capability, purely for
medical and medical research-related
purposes. It's got a nice humanitarian
tone to it. It would be basically
allowing the Iranians to produce fuel
for a small research reactor that's been
in Tehran since 1967, when in one of
those great ironies of history, the
United States gave the reactor to the
Shah of Iran. Mhm.
>> [clears throat]
>> And it's used mostly for production of
pharmaceuticals. It's useful for cancer
treatments and so forth.
And this would allow the Iranians to
say, "We're still enriching." And allow
the United States to say, "We've stopped
all their nuclear weapons activity."
But it's not clear the Iranians will
give up that much capability. And it's
not clear that President Trump
would accept any continued enrichment of
any kind for any purpose.
Given all of that, David, is it possible
that the military build-up that we've
seen is not necessarily
an alternative to diplomacy, but
actually something that the president is
using to sort of strengthen his hand
diplomatically? Like, could he be using
this threat of the military action as
leverage to push for a diplomatic
solution at the talks later this week?
It's very possible. That's the diplomacy
part of gunboat diplomacy.
Of course, the flip side of that,
Rachel, is if you have spent hundreds of
millions, if not billions of dollars,
assembling a huge force off a country's
coast,
the temptation to go use that
is extraordinarily high.
And if his real goal here is regime
change,
then he may not really be that
interested in a diplomatic solution,
because a diplomatic solution would, if
anything,
bolster the existing regime. It would
remain in place.
Just to take a step back here,
the United States has viewed Iran as a
threat for many, many years. So, on the
one hand,
it makes sense that it would continue to
be a priority.
But, on the other hand, during the
second Trump administration, the United
States has really kind of laid out this
worldview of spheres of influence, which
we've talked about a lot on the show.
The idea that the great powers can carve
up the world and consider sections of it
to be under their own purview.
We've seen from the US side that that
has meant the Western Hemisphere.
So, I wonder where you feel like the
Middle East fits into that worldview.
Rachel, you're exactly right. This does
not fit comfortably into the president's
national security strategy that came out
in November.
On the one hand, as you suggest,
American presidents have been pushing
back
on Iran and the Iranian nuclear program
for decades,
ever since the Iran hostage crisis,
right? Which came right after the
Iranian revolution in 1979.
The United States has sabotaged the
Iranian nuclear program over the years.
It's mounted some of the most
sophisticated cyber attacks in history
against Iran's nuclear infrastructure.
So, there's always been a consistent
effort to push back the day when Iran
could get a nuclear weapon. And if you
view it that way, then President Trump
in what he's doing today is escalating
and expanding what has been a
long-running American policy across
Democratic and Republican
administrations.
But, if you view it in the context of
his national security strategy, well,
Iran isn't exactly in the Western
Hemisphere, right? And so, he may just
be seeing a moment to deal with a
long-time adversary
that is going through a period of
remarkable military, economic, and
political weakness.
And I think that's really what's
happening here.
It's not as if the Iranians are in a
position right now to attack us.
Right? Their nuclear program has been
buried. Their economy is at a point of
near collapse. [music]
They are not about to go out of their
way to pick a conflict with the US.
[music]
Instead, the President might be engaging
in what legal and diplomatic historians
call a preventive war.
A war where we are strong, our adversary
is weak, and so we're going to hit them
now because we've got a good chance.
That is in international just war theory
considered to be an illegal use of
force.
That may not stop the President.
>> [music]
>> The President may believe that he'll go
down in history as the one who solved
America's long-running conflict with
Iran that goes back to 1979.
But, if the President decides to take
military action in the next few days or
weeks,
I suspect that historians will look back
at this moment
as a war of choice,
not a war of necessity.
>> [music]
>> David Sanger, thank you so much, [music]
as always.
Thanks, Rachel. Great to be with you.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> Mexican authorities appear to have
restored order in multiple cities after
the killing of a major cartel leader set
off a wave of violence that left at
least 62 [music] people dead.
Mexico's most powerful criminal
organization, the Jalisco New Generation
Cartel, unleashed the chaos after its
leader, Nemesio Oseguera Cervantes,
[music]
or El Mencho, died in a military raid on
Sunday in western Jalisco state. [music]
And
British police arrested the former
[music] ambassador to the United States,
Peter Mandelson, following accusations
that he had passed on confidential
information to the sex offender Jeffrey
Epstein.
The move comes just days after the
arrest of Andrew [music]
Mountbatten-Windsor,
formerly Prince Andrew, on suspicion of
the same offense, and months [music]
after Mandelson was fired once the
extent of his friendship with Epstein
was revealed.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Carlos Prieto, Nina Feldman, and Claire
Tennisgetter.
It was edited by Maria Byrne and Mark
George.
Contains music by Marion Lozano, Alicia
Baeyens, [music]
and Rowan Nemirow.
And was engineered by Chris Wood.
Special thanks [music] to Eric Schmitt
and Mark Mazzetti.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.